and here to give you answers is CNN's
chief medical correspondent dr. Sanjay
Gupta thank you for being here so you
really spoke to dr. pouchy had the NH
infectious disease area of the a lot of
the experts how many people in this
country do we believe are gonna get the
corona virus how big is this gonna be
you start looking at the modeling what
dr. Fauci and others on the task force
say up to 60% they're saying right now
the country could be exposed and
ultimately infected with this virus
within the first year most of America
yes of America within a year yep and and
and the reason that it wouldn't be
everybody is because what happens is as
people get infected they probably do
develop some immunity and it's that
immunity that starts to develop
you know a little bit of a herd
protection for other people but it is it
is spreading it is spreading in
communities we know that we predicted
that we've seen what's happened in other
countries and there's no reason to
believe that some of that won't happen
here well as coronavirus is hitting our
shores you started a new podcasts kornel
virus fact or fiction why why take that
tack you've got a lot of things to do
what's worrying you well you know I felt
like there was so much misinformation
that was getting out there or or maybe
not even misinformation as information
that wasn't contextualized you know as
you know better than anyone Oz is that
in our line of work nuances everything
you've got to give the context here if I
tell you what I just told you 60% of the
country is going to be infected that's
scary you know it's alarming to people
and we don't want to panic people but we
also want to be able to give the context
80% of those people will recover you
know that's important to know we have
some idea from other viruses how this is
likely to play out we can try and figure
out what's going to be the most benefit
to you we know elderly people are most
at risk and we know how to protect them
it was driving me crazy that we kept
saying 80% of the country will be just
fine well what about the 20% is my
parents look and I talk to my parents
every day now and they're asking me
questions about how they protect
themselves real questions real concern
try the greatest service I've done to my
parents as a child you know ever you
know being able to answer some of these
questions we wanted to do it on a
podcast as well
all right let's address all these big
fact and fiction issues that are coming
up first off these what you guys are
asking me can the corona virus mutates
I'm hearing from the scientific
community that it has mutated but that
might not be as big of a problem as we
would have feared yeah this is really
interesting oz first of all it didn't
you take probably to make this jump from
animals to humans they think
incidentally horseshoe bats is where
this likely came from they don't know
for sure what is interesting and you may
know this I've learned this through some
of my biology friends a virus continues
to mutate as it goes through the human
population but viruses I don't wanna
give it a personality but viruses don't
want to kill their hosts so they the
hosts are necessary for viruses to
survive so what does that mean that
means a virus will continue to mutate
but probably into a way into a variant
that is less lethal which is potentially
good news so mutation yes not
necessarily a bad thing though and that
when I heard that I was so relieved guys
because the worst case scenario is a
mutation becomes more deadly that's
right and infectious
that's what that's doesn't that's not a
good move for the Box on evolutionary
sort of pattern for viruses let's sort
of live with us like the flu virus
that's right it doesn't die out because
it just circles new globe alright so in
your opinion would these viruses and
we're hearing news about this will they
be able to reinfect people have already
had to buyer so if most Americans get
the virus this year are we all gonna get
it again next year it's it's it's a I
mean I think that the right answer this
question at this point is we don't know
and that's what most people will say
because there was some reports in Japan
that people may have become reinfected I
spent a lot of time talking to the
coronavirus taskforce about this
particular issue and here's the current
thinking they don't believe that you can
get reinfected they do believe that once
you are exposed to the virus it's kind
of like being vaccinated at least for a
period of time you will get immunity and
then immunity is gonna be beneficial to
the country next up is the coral virus
the most contagious epidemic we have
ever seen or at least in the region you
memory come on back so I put this graph
together based on the best data we can
pull together we compared the spread of
the novel coronavirus to other recent
epidemics like SARS MERS Ebola and h1n1
that swine flu influenza and what we
found was pretty shocking when we look
at the beginning of the outbreaks kurodo
virus that's the yellow line is actually
spreading slower than Ebola and SARS but
by day 41 of their respective outbreaks
you can see the magnitude difference
right the white which the SARS now get
slapped by
coronavirus there's a huge difference
number of people infected compared to
the other diseases it is the most
dramatic outbreak in decades but to go
another 20 days you see swine flu that's
the orange start to increase
dramatically you know why it got the
more than one percent of the population
and it took off so if the same thing
happens to coronavirus which is more
infectious than the swine flu right then
it's gonna indeed infect most people in
this country within the year which has
been predicted by leaders so sadly this
data is startling I mean it just blows
my mind and you've talked to the experts
what is driving the Cova 19 numbers up
so fast
this has been predicted by public health
officials for some time based on what
they were seeing out of China but I do
think this initial part is so
interesting here and when you see it
flattened like this it looks similar to
SARS but actually it was much flatter in
terms compared to size there were many
fewer cases at least here in the United
States based on what we could confirm
and part of that was because of these
amazing things that were happening in
China the largest quarantine in the
history of the world happened within
these past few months think about that
we've never done something like this in
the history of the world
Italy same thing 60 million people over
there so you know you see that
flattening of the curve was because of
those things happening over there it
reduced the number of cases but we knew
this was contagious
eventually it broke free eventually it
broke free and one person can spread it
to two or three and it starts to spread
within communities and that's what
you're sort of seeing here now I'm gonna
point something out although initially
swine flu was sort of low it eventually
popped through here what does this
behavior predict about what might happen
with croto virus when you get past about
one percent of the population being
infected you no longer continue to grow
linearly at that point you either the
growth becomes so explosive because
people are out and about their community
spreading and you see what happened with
h1n1 there so you wanted to keep it as
flat as long as possible by time that
hospitals get prepared when you carry
out this line and and people can see
what happens with h1n1 by the end of
year one there were 60 million people
infected with h1n1 in this country alone
so that's what they're trying to prevent
happening
Crona virus or if it does be prepared
this is the time right now I mean
everything even the distance I'm keeping
from you how hospitals are preparing our
behavior has to change right now in
order for those lines so don't go the
same way that h1n1 and based on the
infectivity and the mortality rates with
that as we understand with Cora virus as
it gets to 1% of population that's why
we're predicting an explosion to most of
the population more than half any way
they think yeah forty to sixty percent
could even be higher than that the core
of virus thankfully may not like the
warm weather so what does this tell us
do you think it's gonna disappear this
spring I've been hearing optimistic
rumors many epidemiologist hope that'll
be the case yeah I think you certainly
hope for that you prepare for it not
happening there's evidence as as you
know from looking at other corona
viruses that it could happen I mean SARS
which we were looking at sort of peaked
end of March early April and then by the
July timeframe had really come way down
as the weather got warmer this type of
virus likes cooler weather it seems but
it's a novel virus so we don't know for
sure how it's going to behave but that
that is a likelihood or a possibility at
least well if it goes away in the summer
which again I'm hearing the same thing
you are is it gonna come back in the
fall like most of these endemic viruses
do the ones that are out spread enough
that they're never going to die off I
think so but hopefully we'll be better
prepared hopefully we'll have some
antivirals and hopefully we'll be much
closer to a vaccine surfaces you
mentioned not getting too close to me
which is a wise move for both I said
everyone around us who cares about I
said the kind of thing could you could
do for your families they've distant
from them but these surfaces can harbor
viruses what's the newest data that
you've heard about how long the corona
virus in particular will live on a piece
of plastic or metal they say it can live
up to days on surfaces like this surface
that's not porous or something like this
it can live for days so that's why
disinfecting and a regular basis is
important and by the way one person
sneezes or coughs and you have to
disinfect again so it is a constant
process you can't say I'm gonna
disinfect on Monday and I'll be good for
a week it has to be a constant process I
get that for workplaces you know right
in the subway public transportation but
what about packages that are being
shipped here for example from China or
now from anywhere frankly current
it's paper yes right that's you can't
why how do you wash that stuff yeah well
it was burning it in China that was
fascinating and so currency I put in a
different category than packages
cardboard and again I looked into this
because everyone's asking me including
my parents down in Florida they buy
stuff on Amazon it's coming in from
China they won't open it until they talk
to me oh gosh the coronavirus really
can't live well on cardboard and on
porous surfaces and then going through
the mail and going through that whole
process the virus probably is not going
to be what they call pathogenic unlikely
to cause disease money's not so porous
you know that's why if money's made of
different material that's why they were
burning currency in in China and I put
another big one on the list which people
may not think of the surface that you
touch more than any other surface your
phone oh my goodness so the idea that
you constantly pull your phone out you
have to be disinfecting your phone you
wash your hands then you touch a dirty
phone it obviously doesn't make sense we
have to be thinking about this stuff
we've had the luxury of not having to
think about this stuff you know we shake
hands you know why we shake hands
we're unarmed yeah unarmed show trust
yeah I have no weapon but now we may
have a weapon it's a virus and and we
don't know it we're not doing it
intentionally but we have to think that
way like we used to think right when we
come back boron the chrono virus with
dr. Sanjay Gupta be sure to subscribe to
my channel so you don't miss anything
remember to check back often to see
what's new